[RFC] Wildcard - stage 1 proposal (#904)
elastic/ecs: rfcs/text/0001-wildcard-data-type.md

A final interesting property of wildcard is its unlimited max character field size. Elasticsearch keyword field default to a max allowed string size of 256 characters which ECS ups to 1024 using `ignore_above`. Keyword can't be increased infinitely because Lucene has a hard set max limit of 32766 bytes for a single term. Due to how wildcard strings are indexed, they do not share this limitation. This makes wildcard the ideal data type for a very large string field (>32kB) that still needs to be indexed.

The next sections details use cases which could benefit wildcard.

### Paths

Flexible nesting of a file path: `file.path:*\\Users\\*\\Temp\\*`
Match under registry path: `registry.path:\\HKLM\\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Image File Execution Options\*\Debugger`

> A unique URL path: `url.full:https://api.example.com/account/*/foobar`

Reviewer: This applies to lines 138 and 139 below as well (Flexible... and Likewise...). Noting this here, to keep separate from that other thread I'm opening on lines 138-139 :-)

The following are common categories

* File and directory paths
* URLs
* Registry data

### Names

Similar to paths, different names components many need to be searched using one or more wildcard.

Flexible host name searching: `host.name:prod-*-db*`

> Likewise, flexible searching of user names or accounts: `user.email:foo*@example.com`

Reviewer: For usernames I think we'll want to stay on `keyword`, because usernames are typically a single word or two, and I'd be surprised that searching for parts of a username is a common thing.

Let's still keep the "Name" section however. I do think some of them may benefit. Upon further reflection, email may be a good fit (e.g. get me all of the gmail addresses: `email:*@gmail.com`), OS names as well, since they can be somewhat messy, and possibly domains names.

I think in stage 2 we should expand this section a bit, and try to capture some of the thinking on which names may benefit most.

at java.base/java.lang.invoke.MethodHandleNatives.linkCallSite(MethodHandleNatives.java:249)
at org.elasticsearch.client.RestHighLevelClient.parseEntity(RestHighLevelClient.java:1883)
at org.elasticsearch.client.RestHighLevelClient.lambda$performRequestAndParseEntity$9(RestHighLevelClient.java:1564)
at org.elasticsearch.client.RestHighLevelClient.internalPerformRequest(RestHighLevelClient.java:1628)
at org.elasticsearch.client.RestHighLevelClient.performRequest(RestHighLevelClient.java:1596)
at org.elasticsearch.client.RestHighLevelClient.performRequestAndParseEntity(RestHighLevelClient.java:1563)
at org.elasticsearch.client.IndicesClient.getMapping(IndicesClient.java:282)

Caused by: java.lang.invoke.LambdaConversionException: Invalid receiver type interface org.apache.http.Header; not a subtype of implementation type interface org.apache.http.NameValuePair
at java.base/java.lang.invoke.AbstractValidatingLambdaMetafactory.validateMetafactoryArgs(AbstractValidatingLambdaMetafactory.java:254)
at java.base/java.lang.invoke.LambdaMetafactory.metafactory(LambdaMetafactory.java:327)
at java.base/java.lang.invoke.BootstrapMethodInvoker.invoke(BootstrapMethodInvoker.java:127)
```

> If I wanted to look for similar events that also contain the phrase `lambda$performRequestAndParseEntity$9(RestHighLevelClient.java`, I'd need a field that supports searching in the middle of a string. Keyword would perform poorly and text would require rethinking the query to match the analyzer and tokenization applied at index time.

Reviewer: Let's avoid first person. E.g. 

> When looking for similar events...

### Command-line execution

> The arguments, order of those arguments, and values passed can be arbitrary in a command-line execution. If searching across multiple arguments, retaining their ordering, and/or the argument-value pairing is key to the search criteria, multiple wildcards patterns may be needed in a single query (if the presence of the arguments/values is the only criteria regardless of ordering or pairing, using a structured field such as `process.args` would be preferred). Wildcard searching such an unstructured field indexed as keyword, like `process.command_line`, can cause performance challenges.

Reviewer: Great info. I would have the whole parens on `.args` as a distinct sentence, rather than in parens.

Example:

```
process.command_line:*f/ foo* and process.command_line:*/b bar*
```

Additional cases for wildcard searching against command line executions:

* Multiple spaces in the command line execution
* Isolating specific substrings where ordering matters
* command obfuscation

> 

Reviewer: I love how the Usage section is broken down into big families of use cases for wildcard.

Perhaps we could add one last section that's not a use case, but that is aimed at helping people make up their mind whether they should use `keyword` or `wildcard`?

And by this I mean including @markharwood's awesome "Comparison with keyword fields" from [the blog post](https://www.elastic.co/blog/find-strings-within-strings-faster-with-the-new-elasticsearch-wildcard-field), as well as the decision tree diagram?

4. If "allow expensive queries" is enabled
5. Depends on common prefixes - keyword fields have common-prefix based compression whereas wildcard fields are whole-value LZ4 compression.
6. Will vary with content but a test indexing weblogs took 499 seconds vs. keyword's 365 seconds.

### Decision Flow

Since deciding between `wildcard` and `keyword` involves weighing tradeoffs, this workflow is a visual to help assess when choosing `wildcard` may provide an advantage [2].

<img width="929" alt="wildcard-field-workflow" src="https://images.contentstack.io/v3/assets/bltefdd0b53724fa2ce/blt086af7a2897168a8/5f37050cdb5c28785b6f0413/blog-wildcard-field-workflow.png">

### Use Cases

The following sections detail use cases which could benefit using the `wildcard` type.

#### Paths

* Flexible nesting of a file path: `file.path:*\\Users\\*\\Temp\\*`
* Match under registry path: `registry.path:\\HKLM\\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Windows NT\CurrentVersion\Image File Execution Options\*\Debugger`
* A unique URL path: `url.full:https://api.example.com/account/*/foobar`

The following are common categories

* File and directory paths
* URLs
* Registry data

#### Names

> Similar to paths, different names components many need to be searched using one or more wildcard.

Reviewer: Not sure, but is "many" a typo, there?

```suggestion
Similar to paths, different names components may need to be searched using one or more wildcard.
```

Author: Yes thank you! 👀

The goal here is to research and understand the impact of these changes on users in the community and development teams across Elastic. 2-5 sentences each.
-->

### Ingestion

Any component producing data (Beats, Logstash, third-party developed, etc.) will need to adopt the mappings in their index templates. The discussion around the handling of OSS vs. Basic field types between OSS and Basic modules/plugins will be handled outside of this proposal.

> ### Usage

Reviewer: We already have another heading named "Usage", this threw me for a bit. Can we rename this heading?

Author: Absolutely 👍

> Part of the 7.9 release is the introduction of the first field family[2], `keyword`. Grouping field types by family is intended to eliminate backwards compatibility issues when replacing an old field with a new specialized type on time-based indices (e.g. `keyword` replaced with `wildcard`). The `wildcard` data type will return `keyword` in the output of the field capabilities API call, and this change will enable both types to behave identically at query time. This feature eliminates concerns arising from Kibana's field compatibility checks in index patterns.

Reviewer: Good idea to explain field families here. Suggesting a few wording tweaks

```suggestion
Part of the 7.9 release is the introduction of the keyword family[2]. Grouping field types by family is intended to eliminate backwards compatibility issues when replacing an older field type with a new, more specialized type on time-based indices (e.g. `keyword` replaced with `wildcard`). The `wildcard` data type will return `keyword` in the output of the field capabilities API call, and this change will enable both types to behave identically at query time. This feature eliminates concerns arising from Kibana's field compatibility checks in index patterns.
```

### ECS project

ECS is and will remain an open source licensed project. However, there will be features available under the Elastic license that will benefit the user experience with the Elastic stack and solutions that have a place in the ECS specification. The ECS project's tooling will create an option in the tooling to generate OSS compatible mappings that continue supporting the OSS licensed features of Elastic. The discussion and implementation of this functionality will take place outside this proposal.

> ## Concerns

Reviewer: I think we should add one more concern to the section, perhaps even as the first subsection. A big driver for all of this effort was actually the combination of improving wildcard/regex performance, but also offering a better story around case insensitivity.

The latter is being addressed independently as a regexp query option, and afaik it's not out yet. I think this should get at least a cursory mention here.

(The rest of this comment isn't for the "concerns" section per se, but a continuation of my thoughts surrounding this)

We will probably even take case insensitivity into account in the whole strategy for adoption of `wildcard`:

* not having case insensitivity yet means `.text` multi-fields continue being relevant for a while
* removing `.text` multi-fields is a breaking change, so where this removal is applicable, it be done will be ECS 2.0, to be introduced with Elastic Stack 8.0...

Author: Yes I can see your point; it should be mentioned prominently.

Fact checking my understanding as I re-review past discussion (e.g. https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/53603#issuecomment-629280978), would stating `wildcard` will be the preferred type over `keyword` for fields needing frequent case-insensitive queries be accurate? At least from ECS' perspective?

Reviewer: I think @markharwood would be best to answer this.

The fact that this will be part of the regexp query means it'll be just as functional on `keyword` fields.

However I don't know for a fact whether it will be more performant on `wildcard`. I assume it will, since iirc the ngram backing `wildcard` is lowercased.

Reviewer: Let's move forward here and assume it will. Let's capture this as a question that needs an answer during stage 2, since this is where we will firm up the precise list of fields to migrate.

Author: Thanks @webmat - captured.

<!--
Stage 1: Identify potential concerns, implementation challenges, or complexity. Spend some time on this. Play devil's advocate. Try to identify the sort of non-obvious challenges that tend to surface later. The goal here is to surface risks early, allow everyone the time to work through them, and ultimately document resolution for posterity's sake.
-->

> ### Licensing

Reviewer: Let's start with the technical concerns here, and have the Licensing at the end of this section

The goal here is to research and understand the impact of these changes on users in the community and development teams across Elastic. 2-5 sentences each.
-->

### Ingestion

Any component producing data (Beats, Logstash, third-party developed, etc.) will need to adopt the mappings in their index templates. The discussion around the handling of OSS vs. Basic field types between OSS and Basic modules/plugins will be handled outside of this proposal.

> 

Reviewer 2: Another important item outside the scope of this proposal is backwards compatibility.  Producers will need to consider the case where the producer has adopted wildcard, but the Elasticsearch instance they are sending data to doesn't support wildcard (example ES 6.8).
